Hey guys, I decided that I would like to see what I can do to start some conversation about consulting at Stride
It's something that I promised @matt that I would do a little while back
Towards that end I'm going to commit to a series of weekly posts for the next several weeks so I can
share my thoughts and things and things that I have learned along the way
The writing might be a bit rough at first but I'd love to get some feedback or potential editors so I can improve as I go

*Why is consulting so hard to learn? The Consulting Arc*

From the beginning of my time as a consultant at Stride people have often discussed how to balance growth in technical leadership versus agile process consulting in our consulting practice. There is an underlying assumption that the two competing halves of software consulting are technical skill as a programmer and agile consulting with the goal of transforming teams. I dislike this dichotomy and I think this mental model is one of the reasons why people often struggle to learn what it means to be an agile consultant when they first join the company

I'd like to propose an alternate model. Technical ability and especially architectural decision making are important tools and they do make a big difference in project success. But I don't think they are the best goals to focus on for new consultants for a handful of reasons. First of all, you are going to have to learn to solve technical problems regardless of whether you ever find any success as a transformative agile consultant. The majority of our clients think that they just need smarter programming wizards when really what they need is stronger team communication and trust to unlock success. Asking why five times is a quick exercise to turn what are ostensibly technical quagmires into more solvable human problems. Consultants that are focused on technical perfection are more likely to fall into the trap of being right but not being very persuasive. If we do excellent technical work but we don't have the tools to show how valuable it is to cross functional client stakeholders, we won't build successful autonomous teams. 

For me the two halves of agile software consulting are first gaining trust and building political social capital and secondly spending that capital back down to effect change. The tricky part is that individual consultants often become very skilled at one or the other half of that equation and at the expense of the other. This epiphany finally explained to me why lots of clients hate the idea of consulting and why lots of seasoned consultants struggle to be flexible enough to create success on our most challenging engagements. If you show up the first week with all of the right answers and treat them as self evident, you are spending social capital that you don't have and risk being brushed aside as an arrogant outsider. If you spend the entire engagement building capital but never spend it down, the client might be satisfied you but you will miss the opportunity to effect lasting change. Not taking real risks also means that you may not learn the skills that you will need at the next client where it might be that much harder to create success than where you are assigned right now.

Clearly identifiable agile transformations are rare successes at Stride and I think it is important that we acknowledge the difficulty of the task that we set out to accomplish. The saving grace is that often we learn the most by pushing for agile practice and failing to effect change. It is enormously valuable to learn what doesn't work and to eventually reflect on your last engagement and see the structural reasons why things didn't work out. Conversely if we are able to create positive change but don't learn what went right, we won't have a repeatable shared practice. We can't control the outcome of every engagement but we should strive to set our consultants up for success and trust them to do their best to create real agile practice. The thing that we can control is teaching each new Strider what consulting means and providing mentorship to maximize what they learn from each of their client experiences.
